## Big Idea: One must learn to accept others, whatever their social status or class. He must show courtesy
to all, compassion for all, and consistency to all. Holding to the Faith in our Lord Jesus Christ, and fulfilling
the royal law are key in a faith that works.

## James 2:1-13
My brothers, show no partiality as you hold the faith in our Lord Jesus Christ, the Lord of glory. 2 For if a
man wearing a gold ring and fine clothing comes into your assembly, and a poor man in shabby clothing
also comes in, 3 and if you pay attention to the one who wears the fine clothing and say, “You sit here in a
good place,” while you say to the poor man, “You stand over there,” or, “Sit down at my feet,” 4 have you not
then made distinctions among yourselves and become judges with evil thoughts? 5 Listen, my beloved
brothers, has not God chosen those who are poor in the world to be rich in faith and heirs of the kingdom,
which he has promised to those who love him? 6 But you have dishonored the poor man. Are not the rich the
ones who oppress you, and the ones who drag you into court? 7 Are they not the ones who blaspheme the
honorable name by which you were called? 8 If you really fulfill the royal law according to the Scripture, “You
shall love your neighbor as yourself,” you are doing well. 9 But if you show partiality, you are committing sin
and are convicted by the law as transgressors. 10 For whoever keeps the whole law but fails in one point has
become guilty of all of it. 11 For he who said, “Do not commit adultery,” also said, “Do not murder.” If you do
not commit adultery but do murder, you have become a transgressor of the law. 12 So speak and so act as
those who are to be judged under the law of liberty. 13 For judgment is without mercy to one who has shown
no mercy. Mercy triumphs over judgment.

## Discussion Questions:
1. James gives an example of showing favoritism to the rich in verses 2-4. Why do you think this is a
problem in the context of the early church? How might it still be relevant today?
2. James has been emphasizing a faith that is at work. Why is it important to have a life that is filled with
fruit (works)? And on the same hand, how should we be warning those who claim to be Christians but
don’t have the fruit (works)?
3. Why do you think God spends so much time talking about the poor? Read Deut. 15:7-11; Ps. 41:1;
Prov. 17:5
4. James 2:8 Showing partiality is clearly a sin, so, how do we personally incorporate the royal law into
our lives to prevent this? In other words, how are you loving your neighbor as yourself?
5. The law of liberty frees us from judgment and punishment of our sin. Why does this also free us from
following the Lord in love? If you have no mercy for others, does that reflect a life change and
regenerated by a God?

## Prayer Focus:
Confess any sins of partiality and favoritism. Give thanks for the mercy that God has shown each person
who has been granted repentance and faith. And pray that God would grant mercy when we do sin and
show favoritism. Psalm 28:2 - Hear the voice of my pleas for mercy, when I cry to you for help, when I lift
up my hands toward your most holy sanctuary.

## Next Steps:
Evaluate your life and see where you can help someone who is in need. If you have the resources to help
them, try and help them. The heart of God was always to care for those in need. Develop a habit of
helping those in need.